README.md, before:

# CL-FORM-TYPES

This library provides functions for determine the value types of
Common Lisp forms, based on type information stored in the
environment.

Currently the types of the following forms can be determined:

* Literal values
* Symbols naming variables for which there are `TYPE` declarations
* Symbols naming constants
* Lists where the `CAR` is a function for which there is an `FTYPE`
  declaration
* `THE` forms

Macros and symbol-macros are fully expanded and all special
forms, except `CATCH`, are supported.

This library depends on
[cl-environments](https://alex-gutev.github.io/cl-environments/) in
order to extract information from the environment using the CLTL2
API. Check the library's documentation for details on how to use so
that the type information is available across all implementations, and
details on its limitations.

## Package CL-FORM-TYPES

### FORM-TYPE

Function `FORM-TYPE FORM ENV &KEY CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS`

Determine the type of a form in a given environment.

* `FORM` - The form of which to determine the type
* `ENV` - The environment in which the form is found
* `CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES` - If true an `EQL` type specifier is returned
  for all forms which evaluate to constant values. Otherwise (the
  default) an `EQL` type specifier is returned only for those forms
  which evaluate to a constant comparable with `EQL`.
* `EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS` - If true compiler-macros are expanded in
  FORM and its subforms before determining form types.

Returns the type specifier of the value to which `FORM` evaluates. If
`FORM` evaluates to multiple values a `(VALUES ...)` type is
returned. If the type of `FORM` could not be determined `T` is
returned.

### NTH-FORM-TYPE

Function `NTH-FORM-TYPE FORM ENV &OPTIONAL (N 0) CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS`

Determine the type of the nth return value of a form.

* `FORM` - The form of which to determine the type
* `ENV` - The environment in which the form is found
* `N` - Index of the value, type of which, to return
* `CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES` - If true an `EQL` type specifier is returned
  for all forms which evaluate to constant values. Otherwise (the
  default) an `EQL` type specifier is returned only for those forms
  which evaluate to a constant comparable with `EQL`.
* `EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS` - If true compiler-macros are expanded in
  FORM and its subforms before determining form types.

Returns the type specifier of the `N`th value returned by `FORM`. If
`FORM` only returns a single value or returns less values than `N`,
`NIL` is returned.

### NTH-VALUE-TYPE

Function `NTH-VALUE-TYPE TYPE &OPTIONAL (N 0)`

Extract the type of the nth return value from a `VALUES` type
specifier.

* `TYPE` - A type specifier. If not a `VALUES` type specifier it is
  treated as a `VALUES` type specifier of a single return value.
* `N` - Index of the value of which to retrieve the type.

Returns the nth value type or NIL if there is no information about the
nth return value, that is the actual number of values in the type
specifier is less than `N`.

### FORM-TYPES

Function `FORM-TYPES FORMS ENV &KEY CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS`

Determine the type of each form in a list.

* `FORMS` - List of forms of which to determine the types
* `ENV` - Environment in which the forms are found
* `CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES` - If true an `EQL` type specifier is returned
  for all forms which evaluate to constant values. Otherwise (the
  default) an `EQL` type specifier is returned only for those forms
  which evaluate to a constant comparable with `EQL`.
* `EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS` - If true compiler-macros are expanded in
  FORM and its subforms before determining form types.

Returns a list where each element is the type specifier of the
corresponding form in `FORMS`.

### CUSTOM-FORM-TYPE

Generic Function `CUSTOM-FORM-TYPE OPERATOR ARGUMENTS ENV`

Generic function for determining the type of non-standard special
forms and function calls.

This function is not intended to be called directly but is intended to
be extended with methods to add custom type deduction logic for
function calls and non-standard special forms.

* `OPERATOR` - Expression operator
* `ARGUMENTS` - List of argument forms
* `ENV` - Environment in which the form is found.

**NOTE:** The environment argument is not necessarily a native
environment object, but may be an augmented environment object,
therefore it should not be passed directly to built in functions which
expect an environment object but rather the equivalent functions from
the `CL-ENVIRONMENTS-CL` package should be used, see
<https://alex-gutev.github.io/cl-environments/#wrapper_functions>.

Returns the value type of the form `(OPERATOR . ARGUMENTS)`, or `T` if
it's type could not be determined.

### MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR

Condition `MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR`

Condition signalled when a malformed form is passed to one of the
`FORM-TYPE` functions.

Slots:

* `FORM` - The malformed form.

### RETURN-DEFAULT-TYPE

Function `RETURN-DEFAULT-TYPE &OPTIONAL (TYPE T)`

Invoke the `RETURN-DEFAULT-TYPE` restart.

This restart, for a `MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR` condition, returns the type
`TYPE` as the form type for the malformed form.

## Type Deduction Logic

This section contains notes on how types are deduced for various
form types.

### LAMBDA Expressions

This refers to lambda expressions occurring within `FUNCTION` forms
and as the operator (the `CAR`) of an expression.

#### In FUNCTION Form

When the argument to a `FUNCTION` form is a `LAMBDA` expression, a
list-form `FUNCTION` type is returned with argument and return value
types.

The number of arguments is deduced from the expression's lambda-list,
with the types deduced from type declarations immediately within the
expression body. If the type cannot be determined for an argument `*`
is placed in its position within the function type specifier.

The return value type is deduced from the return value type of the
last form in the expression body. If this cannot be determined, `T` is
placed as the return value type in the function type specifier.

**Examples:**

```lisp

(form-type
  '#'(lambda (x &optional y &key z)
       (pprint y)
       (pprint z)
       x)
   nil)

;; Returns

(function (* &optional * &key (:z *)) t)
```

A more detailed type is returned when the types of the argument
variables are declared:

```lisp
(form-type
  '#'(lambda (x &optional y &key z)
       (declare (type number x)
                (type symbol y)
                (type string z))

       (pprint y)
       (pprint z)
       x)
   NIL)

;; Returns

(function (number &optional symbol &key (:z string)) number)
```


#### As Form Operator

When a lambda expression appears as the operator in a form, the type
of the lambda expression is deduced and the return type of the
`FUNCTION` type specifier, is returned as the type of the form.


## BLOCK forms

The type of a `BLOCK` form is deduced not only by the type of the last
form in its body but also by analysing the forms within the body of
the `BLOCK` form and combining the types of the result forms in each
`RETURN-FROM` form, that has a block name that matches the name of the
`BLOCK` form.

`RETURN-FROM` forms which appear within a lexically defined function,
by `FLET` or `LABELS`, are only included in the analysis if that
lexically defined function is called or referenced by a `FUNCTION`
form.

**Examples:**

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (do-something 1)
    (do-something 2)
    (the number (+ x y)))

  NIL)

;; Returns

number
```

With a `RETURN-FROM` form:

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (when (evenp x)
       (return-from blk 'even))

    (the number (+ x y)))

  NIL)

;; Returns

(or number (eql even))
```

With a `RETURN-FROM` inside a lexically defined function which is not
called:

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (flet ((test (x)
             (when (evenp x)
               (return-from blk 'even))
             x))

     (the number (+ x y))))

  NIL)

;; Returns

number
```

**NOTE:** The type of the `RETURN-FROM` form inside the `TEST` function is
not included since the function is never called.

With a `RETURN-FROM` inside a lexically defined function which is
referenced:

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (flet ((test (x)
             (when (evenp x)
               (return-from blk 'even))
             x))

     (the list (mapcar #'test numbers))))

  NIL)

;; Returns

(or list (eql even))
```

**NOTE:** The type of the `RETURN-FROM` form inside the `TEST`
function is included despite the function never being called since the
function is referenced with `(FUNCTION TEST)` (`#'TEST`), thus it
could potentially be called.

## CATCH forms

No type deduction logic is performed on `CATCH` forms as of yet, due
to the difficulty of the problem posed by dynamic tag names. Thus,
`FORM-TYPE` simply returns `T` when given a `CATCH` form.

Commit message:

Add not about MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR inheriting from PROGRAM-ERROR.

README.md, after:

# CL-FORM-TYPES

This library provides functions for determine the value types of
Common Lisp forms, based on type information stored in the
environment.

Currently the types of the following forms can be determined:

* Literal values
* Symbols naming variables for which there are `TYPE` declarations
* Symbols naming constants
* Lists where the `CAR` is a function for which there is an `FTYPE`
  declaration
* `THE` forms

Macros and symbol-macros are fully expanded and all special
forms, except `CATCH`, are supported.

This library depends on
[cl-environments](https://alex-gutev.github.io/cl-environments/) in
order to extract information from the environment using the CLTL2
API. Check the library's documentation for details on how to use so
that the type information is available across all implementations, and
details on its limitations.

## Package CL-FORM-TYPES

### FORM-TYPE

Function `FORM-TYPE FORM ENV &KEY CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS`

Determine the type of a form in a given environment.

* `FORM` - The form of which to determine the type
* `ENV` - The environment in which the form is found
* `CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES` - If true an `EQL` type specifier is returned
  for all forms which evaluate to constant values. Otherwise (the
  default) an `EQL` type specifier is returned only for those forms
  which evaluate to a constant comparable with `EQL`.
* `EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS` - If true compiler-macros are expanded in
  FORM and its subforms before determining form types.

Returns the type specifier of the value to which `FORM` evaluates. If
`FORM` evaluates to multiple values a `(VALUES ...)` type is
returned. If the type of `FORM` could not be determined `T` is
returned.

### NTH-FORM-TYPE

Function `NTH-FORM-TYPE FORM ENV &OPTIONAL (N 0) CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS`

Determine the type of the nth return value of a form.

* `FORM` - The form of which to determine the type
* `ENV` - The environment in which the form is found
* `N` - Index of the value, type of which, to return
* `CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES` - If true an `EQL` type specifier is returned
  for all forms which evaluate to constant values. Otherwise (the
  default) an `EQL` type specifier is returned only for those forms
  which evaluate to a constant comparable with `EQL`.
* `EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS` - If true compiler-macros are expanded in
  FORM and its subforms before determining form types.

Returns the type specifier of the `N`th value returned by `FORM`. If
`FORM` only returns a single value or returns less values than `N`,
`NIL` is returned.

### NTH-VALUE-TYPE

Function `NTH-VALUE-TYPE TYPE &OPTIONAL (N 0)`

Extract the type of the nth return value from a `VALUES` type
specifier.

* `TYPE` - A type specifier. If not a `VALUES` type specifier it is
  treated as a `VALUES` type specifier of a single return value.
* `N` - Index of the value of which to retrieve the type.

Returns the nth value type or NIL if there is no information about the
nth return value, that is the actual number of values in the type
specifier is less than `N`.

### FORM-TYPES

Function `FORM-TYPES FORMS ENV &KEY CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS`

Determine the type of each form in a list.

* `FORMS` - List of forms of which to determine the types
* `ENV` - Environment in which the forms are found
* `CONSTANT-EQL-TYPES` - If true an `EQL` type specifier is returned
  for all forms which evaluate to constant values. Otherwise (the
  default) an `EQL` type specifier is returned only for those forms
  which evaluate to a constant comparable with `EQL`.
* `EXPAND-COMPILER-MACROS` - If true compiler-macros are expanded in
  FORM and its subforms before determining form types.

Returns a list where each element is the type specifier of the
corresponding form in `FORMS`.

### CUSTOM-FORM-TYPE

Generic Function `CUSTOM-FORM-TYPE OPERATOR ARGUMENTS ENV`

Generic function for determining the type of non-standard special
forms and function calls.

This function is not intended to be called directly but is intended to
be extended with methods to add custom type deduction logic for
function calls and non-standard special forms.

* `OPERATOR` - Expression operator
* `ARGUMENTS` - List of argument forms
* `ENV` - Environment in which the form is found.

**NOTE:** The environment argument is not necessarily a native
environment object, but may be an augmented environment object,
therefore it should not be passed directly to built in functions which
expect an environment object but rather the equivalent functions from
the `CL-ENVIRONMENTS-CL` package should be used, see
<https://alex-gutev.github.io/cl-environments/#wrapper_functions>.

Returns the value type of the form `(OPERATOR . ARGUMENTS)`, or `T` if
it's type could not be determined.

### MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR

Condition `MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR (PROGRAM-ERROR)`

Condition signalled when a malformed form is passed to one of the
`FORM-TYPE` functions.

**NOTE:** Inherits from the `PROGRAM-ERROR` condition which may also
be signalled.

Slots:

* `FORM` - The malformed form.

### RETURN-DEFAULT-TYPE

Function `RETURN-DEFAULT-TYPE &OPTIONAL (TYPE T)`

Invoke the `RETURN-DEFAULT-TYPE` restart.

This restart, for a `MALFORMED-FORM-ERROR` condition, returns the type
`TYPE` as the form type for the malformed form.

## Type Deduction Logic

This section contains notes on how types are deduced for various
form types.

### LAMBDA Expressions

This refers to lambda expressions occurring within `FUNCTION` forms
and as the operator (the `CAR`) of an expression.

#### In FUNCTION Form

When the argument to a `FUNCTION` form is a `LAMBDA` expression, a
list-form `FUNCTION` type is returned with argument and return value
types.

The number of arguments is deduced from the expression's lambda-list,
with the types deduced from type declarations immediately within the
expression body. If the type cannot be determined for an argument `*`
is placed in its position within the function type specifier.

The return value type is deduced from the return value type of the
last form in the expression body. If this cannot be determined, `T` is
placed as the return value type in the function type specifier.

**Examples:**

```lisp

(form-type
  '#'(lambda (x &optional y &key z)
       (pprint y)
       (pprint z)
       x)
   nil)

;; Returns

(function (* &optional * &key (:z *)) t)
```

A more detailed type is returned when the types of the argument
variables are declared:

```lisp
(form-type
  '#'(lambda (x &optional y &key z)
       (declare (type number x)
                (type symbol y)
                (type string z))

       (pprint y)
       (pprint z)
       x)
   NIL)

;; Returns

(function (number &optional symbol &key (:z string)) number)
```


#### As Form Operator

When a lambda expression appears as the operator in a form, the type
of the lambda expression is deduced and the return type of the
`FUNCTION` type specifier, is returned as the type of the form.


## BLOCK forms

The type of a `BLOCK` form is deduced not only by the type of the last
form in its body but also by analysing the forms within the body of
the `BLOCK` form and combining the types of the result forms in each
`RETURN-FROM` form, that has a block name that matches the name of the
`BLOCK` form.

`RETURN-FROM` forms which appear within a lexically defined function,
by `FLET` or `LABELS`, are only included in the analysis if that
lexically defined function is called or referenced by a `FUNCTION`
form.

**Examples:**

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (do-something 1)
    (do-something 2)
    (the number (+ x y)))

  NIL)

;; Returns

number
```

With a `RETURN-FROM` form:

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (when (evenp x)
       (return-from blk 'even))

    (the number (+ x y)))

  NIL)

;; Returns

(or number (eql even))
```

With a `RETURN-FROM` inside a lexically defined function which is not
called:

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (flet ((test (x)
             (when (evenp x)
               (return-from blk 'even))
             x))

     (the number (+ x y))))

  NIL)

;; Returns

number
```

**NOTE:** The type of the `RETURN-FROM` form inside the `TEST` function is
not included since the function is never called.

With a `RETURN-FROM` inside a lexically defined function which is
referenced:

```lisp
(form-type
 '(block blk
    (flet ((test (x)
             (when (evenp x)
               (return-from blk 'even))
             x))

     (the list (mapcar #'test numbers))))

  NIL)

;; Returns

(or list (eql even))
```

**NOTE:** The type of the `RETURN-FROM` form inside the `TEST`
function is included despite the function never being called since the
function is referenced with `(FUNCTION TEST)` (`#'TEST`), thus it
could potentially be called.

## CATCH forms

No type deduction logic is performed on `CATCH` forms as of yet, due
to the difficulty of the problem posed by dynamic tag names. Thus,
`FORM-TYPE` simply returns `T` when given a `CATCH` form.
